 when he returned to capernaum after some days , it was reported that he was at home . 
 so many gathered around that there was no longer room for them , not even in front of the door ; and he was speaking the word to them . 
 then some people came , bringing to him a paralyzed man , carried by four of them . 
 and when they could not bring him to jesus because of the crowd , they removed the roof above him ; and after having dug through it , they let down the mat on which the paralytic lay . 
 when jesus saw their faith , he said to the paralytic , son , your sins are forgiven . 
 now some of the scribes were sitting there , questioning in their hearts , why does this fellow speak in this way ? 
 it is blasphemy ! 
 who can forgive sins but god alone ? 
 at once jesus perceived in his spirit that they were discussing these questions among themselves ; and he said to them , why do you raise such questions in your hearts ? 
 which is easier , to say to the paralytic , your sins are forgiven , or to say , stand up and take your mat and walk ? 
 but so that you may know that the son of man has authority on earth to forgive sins -he said to the paralytic- i say to you , stand up , take your mat and go to your home . 
 and he stood up , and immediately took the mat and went out before all of them ; so that they were all amazed and glorified god , saying , we have never seen anything like this ! 
 jesus went out again beside the sea ; the whole crowd gathered around him , and he taught them . 
 as he was walking along , he saw levi son of alphaeus sitting at the tax booth , and he said to him , follow me . 
 and he got up and followed him . 
 and as he sat at dinner in levis house , many tax collectors and sinners were also sitting with jesus and his disciples-for there were many who followed him . 
 when the scribes of the pharisees saw that he was eating with sinners and tax collectors , they said to his disciples , why does he eat with tax collectors and sinners ? 
 when jesus heard this , he said to them , those who are well have no need of a physician , but those who are sick ; i have come to call not the righteous but sinners . 
 now johns disciples and the pharisees were fasting ; and people came and said to him , why do johns disciples and the disciples of the pharisees fast , but your disciples do not fast ? 
 jesus said to them , the wedding guests cannot fast while the bridegroom is with them , can they ? 
 as long as they have the bridegroom with them , they cannot fast . 
 the days will come when the bridegroom is taken away from them , and then they will fast on that day . 
 no one sews a piece of unshrunk cloth on an old cloak ; otherwise , the patch pulls away from it , the new from the old , and a worse tear is made . 
 and no one puts new wine into old wineskins ; otherwise , the wine will burst the skins , and the wine is lost , and so are the skins ; but one puts new wine into fresh wineskins . 
 one sabbath he was going through the grainfields ; and as they made their way his disciples began to pluck heads of grain . 
 the pharisees said to him , look , why are they doing what is not lawful on the sabbath ? 
 and he said to them , have you never read what david did when he and his companions were hungry and in need of food ? 
 he entered the house of god , when abiathar was high priest , and ate the bread of the presence , which it is not lawful for any but the priests to eat , and he gave some to his companions . 
 then he said to them , the sabbath was made for humankind , and not humankind for the sabbath ; so the son of man is lord even of the sabbath . 
 again he entered the synagogue , and a man was there who had a withered hand . 
 they watched him to see whether he would cure him on the sabbath , so that they might accuse him . 
 and he said to the man who had the withered hand , come forward . 
 then he said to them , is it lawful to do good or to do harm on the sabbath , to save life or to kill ? 
 but they were silent . 
 he looked around at them with anger ; he was grieved at their hardness of heart and said to the man , stretch out your hand . 
 he stretched it out , and his hand was restored . 
 the pharisees went out and immediately conspired with the herodians against him , how to destroy him . 
 jesus departed with his disciples to the sea , and a great multitude from galilee followed him ; hearing all that he was doing , they came to him in great numbers from judea , jerusalem , idumea , beyond the jordan , and the region around tyre and sidon . 
 he told his disciples to have a boat ready for him because of the crowd , so that they would not crush him ; for he had cured many , so that all who had diseases pressed upon him to touch him . 
 whenever the unclean spirits saw him , they fell down before him and shouted , you are the son of god ! 
 but he sternly ordered them not to make him known . 
 he went up the mountain and called to him those whom he wanted , and they came to him . 
 and he appointed twelve , whom he also named apostles , to be with him , and to be sent out to proclaim the message , and to have authority to cast out demons . 
 so he appointed the twelve : simon (to whom he gave the name peter); james son of zebedee and john the brother of james (to whom he gave the name boanerges , that is , sons of thunder); and andrew , and philip , and bartholomew , and matthew , and thomas , and james son of alphaeus , and thaddaeus , and simon the cananaean , and judas iscariot , who betrayed him . 
 then he went home ; and the crowd came together again , so that they could not even eat . 
 when his family heard it , they went out to restrain him , for people were saying , he has gone out of his mind . 
 and the scribes who came down from jerusalem said , he has beelzebul , and by the ruler of the demons he casts out demons . 
 and he called them to him , and spoke to them in parables , how can satan cast out satan ? 
 if a kingdom is divided against itself , that kingdom cannot stand . 
 and if a house is divided against itself , that house will not be able to stand . 
 and if satan has risen up against himself and is divided , he cannot stand , but his end has come . 
 but no one can enter a strong mans house and plunder his property without first tying up the strong man ; then indeed the house can be plundered . 
 truly i tell you , people will be forgiven for their sins and whatever blasphemies they utter ; but whoever blasphemes against the holy spirit can never have forgiveness , but is guilty of an eternal sin- for they had said , he has an unclean spirit . 
 then his mother and his brothers came ; and standing outside , they sent to him and called him . 
 a crowd was sitting around him ; and they said to him , your mother and your brothers and sisters are outside , asking for you . 
 and he replied , who are my mother and my brothers ? 
 and looking at those who sat around him , he said , here are my mother and my brothers ! 
 whoever does the will of god is my brother and sister and mother . 
 again he began to teach beside the sea . 
 such a very large crowd gathered around him that he got into a boat on the sea and sat there , while the whole crowd was beside the sea on the land . 
 he began to teach them many things in parables , and in his teaching he said to them : listen ! 
 a sower went out to sow . 
 and as he sowed , some seed fell on the path , and the birds came and ate it up . 
 other seed fell on rocky ground , where it did not have much soil , and it sprang up quickly , since it had no depth of soil . 
 and when the sun rose , it was scorched ; and since it had no root , it withered away . 
 other seed fell among thorns , and the thorns grew up and choked it , and it yielded no grain . 
 other seed fell into good soil and brought forth grain , growing up and increasing and yielding thirty and sixty and a hundredfold . 
 and he said , let anyone with ears to hear listen ! 
 when he was alone , those who were around him along with the twelve asked him about the parables . 
 and he said to them , to you has been given the secret of the kingdom of god , but for those outside , everything comes in parables ; in order that 
 they may indeed look , but not perceive , 
 and may indeed listen , but not understand ; 
 so that they may not turn again and be forgiven . 
 and he said to them , do you not understand this parable ? 
 then how will you understand all the parables ? 
 the sower sows the word . 
 these are the ones on the path where the word is sown : when they hear , satan immediately comes and takes away the word that is sown in them . 
 and these are the ones sown on rocky ground : when they hear the word , they immediately receive it with joy . 
 but they have no root , and endure only for a while ; then , when trouble or persecution arises on account of the word , immediately they fall away . 
 and others are those sown among the thorns : these are the ones who hear the word , but the cares of the world , and the lure of wealth , and the desire for other things come in and choke the word , and it yields nothing . 
 and these are the ones sown on the good soil : they hear the word and accept it and bear fruit , thirty and sixty and a hundredfold . 
 he said to them , is a lamp brought in to be put under the bushel basket , or under the bed , and not on the lampstand ? 
 for there is nothing hidden , except to be disclosed ; nor is anything secret , except to come to light . 
 let anyone with ears to hear listen ! 
 and he said to them , pay attention to what you hear ; the measure you give will be the measure you get , and still more will be given you . 
 for to those who have , more will be given ; and from those who have nothing , even what they have will be taken away . 
 he also said , the kingdom of god is as if someone would scatter seed on the ground , and would sleep and rise night and day , and the seed would sprout and grow , he does not know how . 
 the earth produces of itself , first the stalk , then the head , then the full grain in the head . 
 but when the grain is ripe , at once he goes in with his sickle , because the harvest has come . 
 he also said , with what can we compare the kingdom of god , or what parable will we use for it ? 
 it is like a mustard seed , which , when sown upon the ground , is the smallest of all the seeds on earth ; yet when it is sown it grows up and becomes the greatest of all shrubs , and puts forth large branches , so that the birds of the air can make nests in its shade . 
 with many such parables he spoke the word to them , as they were able to hear it ; he did not speak to them except in parables , but he explained everything in private to his disciples . 
 on that day , when evening had come , he said to them , let us go across to the other side . 
 and leaving the crowd behind , they took him with them in the boat , just as he was . 
 other boats were with him . 
 a great windstorm arose , and the waves beat into the boat , so that the boat was already being swamped . 
 but he was in the stern , asleep on the cushion ; and they woke him up and said to him , teacher , do you not care that we are perishing ? 
 he woke up and rebuked the wind , and said to the sea , peace ! 
 be still ! 
 then the wind ceased , and there was a dead calm . 
 he said to them , why are you afraid ? 
 have you still no faith ? 
 and they were filled with great awe and said to one another , who then is this , that even the wind and the sea obey him ? 
 they came to the other side of the sea , to the country of the gerasenes . 
 and when he had stepped out of the boat , immediately a man out of the tombs with an unclean spirit met him . 
 he lived among the tombs ; and no one could restrain him any more , even with a chain ; for he had often been restrained with shackles and chains , but the chains he wrenched apart , and the shackles he broke in pieces ; and no one had the strength to subdue him . 
 night and day among the tombs and on the mountains he was always howling and bruising himself with stones . 
 when he saw jesus from a distance , he ran and bowed down before him ; and he shouted at the top of his voice , what have you to do with me , jesus , son of the most high god ? 
 i adjure you by god , do not torment me . 
 for he had said to him , come out of the man , you unclean spirit ! 
 then jesus asked him , what is your name ? 
 he replied , my name is legion ; for we are many . 
 he begged him earnestly not to send them out of the country . 
 now there on the hillside a great herd of swine was feeding ; and the unclean spirits begged him , send us into the swine ; let us enter them . 
 so he gave them permission . 
 and the unclean spirits came out and entered the swine ; and the herd , numbering about two thousand , rushed down the steep bank into the sea , and were drowned in the sea . 
 the swineherds ran off and told it in the city and in the country . 
 then people came to see what it was that had happened . 
 they came to jesus and saw the demoniac sitting there , clothed and in his right mind , the very man who had had the legion ; and they were afraid . 
 those who had seen what had happened to the demoniac and to the swine reported it . 
 then they began to beg jesus to leave their neighborhood . 
 as he was getting into the boat , the man who had been possessed by demons begged him that he might be with him . 
 but jesus refused , and said to him , go home to your friends , and tell them how much the lord has done for you , and what mercy he has shown you . 
 and he went away and began to proclaim in the decapolis how much jesus had done for him ; and everyone was amazed . 
 when jesus had crossed again in the boat to the other side , a great crowd gathered around him ; and he was by the sea . 
 then one of the leaders of the synagogue named jairus came and , when he saw him , fell at his feet and begged him repeatedly , my little daughter is at the point of death . 
 come and lay your hands on her , so that she may be made well , and live . 
 so he went with him . 
 and a large crowd followed him and pressed in on him . 
 now there was a woman who had been suffering from hemorrhages for twelve years . 
 she had endured much under many physicians , and had spent all that she had ; and she was no better , but rather grew worse . 
 she had heard about jesus , and came up behind him in the crowd and touched his cloak , for she said , if i but touch his clothes , i will be made well . 
 immediately her hemorrhage stopped ; and she felt in her body that she was healed of her disease . 
 immediately aware that power had gone forth from him , jesus turned about in the crowd and said , who touched my clothes ? 
 and his disciples said to him , you see the crowd pressing in on you ; how can you say , who touched me ? he looked all around to see who had done it . 
 but the woman , knowing what had happened to her , came in fear and trembling , fell down before him , and told him the whole truth . 
 he said to her , daughter , your faith has made you well ; go in peace , and be healed of your disease . 
 while he was still speaking , some people came from the leaders house to say , your daughter is dead . 
 why trouble the teacher any further ? 
 but overhearing what they said , jesus said to the leader of the synagogue , do not fear , only believe . 
 he allowed no one to follow him except peter , james , and john , the brother of james . 
 when they came to the house of the leader of the synagogue , he saw a commotion , people weeping and wailing loudly . 
 when he had entered , he said to them , why do you make a commotion and weep ? 
 the child is not dead but sleeping . 
 and they laughed at him . 
 then he put them all outside , and took the childs father and mother and those who were with him , and went in where the child was . 
 he took her by the hand and said to her , talitha cum , which means , little girl , get up ! 
 and immediately the girl got up and began to walk about (she was twelve years of age). 
 at this they were overcome with amazement . 
 he strictly ordered them that no one should know this , and told them to give her something to eat . 
 he left that place and came to his hometown , and his disciples followed him . 
 on the sabbath he began to teach in the synagogue , and many who heard him were astounded . 
 they said , where did this man get all this ? 
 what is this wisdom that has been given to him ? 
 what deeds of power are being done by his hands ! 
 is not this the carpenter , the son of mary and brother of james and joses and judas and simon , and are not his sisters here with us ? 
 and they took offense at him . 
 then jesus said to them , prophets are not without honor , except in their hometown , and among their own kin , and in their own house . 
 and he could do no deed of power there , except that he laid his hands on a few sick people and cured them . 
 and he was amazed at their unbelief . 
 then he went about among the villages teaching . 
 he called the twelve and began to send them out two by two , and gave them authority over the unclean spirits . 
 he ordered them to take nothing for their journey except a staff ; no bread , no bag , no money in their belts ; but to wear sandals and not to put on two tunics . 
 he said to them , wherever you enter a house , stay there until you leave the place . 
 if any place will not welcome you and they refuse to hear you , as you leave , shake off the dust that is on your feet as a testimony against them . 
 so they went out and proclaimed that all should repent . 
 they cast out many demons , and anointed with oil many who were sick and cured them . 
 king herod heard of it , for jesus name had become known . 
 some were saying , john the baptizer has been raised from the dead ; and for this reason these powers are at work in him . 
 but others said , it is elijah . 
 and others said , it is a prophet , like one of the prophets of old . 
 but when herod heard of it , he said , john , whom i beheaded , has been raised . 
 for herod himself had sent men who arrested john , bound him , and put him in prison on account of herodias , his brother philips wife , because herod had married her . 
 for john had been telling herod , it is not lawful for you to have your brothers wife . 
 and herodias had a grudge against him , and wanted to kill him . 
 but she could not , for herod feared john , knowing that he was a righteous and holy man , and he protected him . 
 when he heard him , he was greatly perplexed ; and yet he liked to listen to him . 
 but an opportunity came when herod on his birthday gave a banquet for his courtiers and officers and for the leaders of galilee . 
 when his daughter herodias came in and danced , she pleased herod and his guests ; and the king said to the girl , ask me for whatever you wish , and i will give it . 
 and he solemnly swore to her , whatever you ask me , i will give you , even half of my kingdom . 
 she went out and said to her mother , what should i ask for ? 
 she replied , the head of john the baptizer . 
 immediately she rushed back to the king and requested , i want you to give me at once the head of john the baptist on a platter . 
 the king was deeply grieved ; yet out of regard for his oaths and for the guests , he did not want to refuse her . 
 immediately the king sent a soldier of the guard with orders to bring johns head . 
 he went and beheaded him in the prison , brought his head on a platter , and gave it to the girl . 
 then the girl gave it to her mother . 
 when his disciples heard about it , they came and took his body , and laid it in a tomb . 
 the apostles gathered around jesus , and told him all that they had done and taught . 
 he said to them , come away to a deserted place all by yourselves and rest a while . 
 for many were coming and going , and they had no leisure even to eat . 
 and they went away in the boat to a deserted place by themselves . 
 now many saw them going and recognized them , and they hurried there on foot from all the towns and arrived ahead of them . 
 as he went ashore , he saw a great crowd ; and he had compassion for them , because they were like sheep without a shepherd ; and he began to teach them many things . 
 when it grew late , his disciples came to him and said , this is a deserted place , and the hour is now very late ; send them away so that they may go into the surrounding country and villages and buy something for themselves to eat . 
 but he answered them , you give them something to eat . 
 they said to him , are we to go and buy two hundred denarii worth of bread , and give it to them to eat ? 
 and he said to them , how many loaves have you ? 
 go and see . 
 when they had found out , they said , five , and two fish . 
 then he ordered them to get all the people to sit down in groups on the green grass . 
 so they sat down in groups of hundreds and of fifties . 
 taking the five loaves and the two fish , he looked up to heaven , and blessed and broke the loaves , and gave them to his disciples to set before the people ; and he divided the two fish among them all . 
 and all ate and were filled ; and they took up twelve baskets full of broken pieces and of the fish . 
 those who had eaten the loaves numbered five thousand men . 
 immediately he made his disciples get into the boat and go on ahead to the other side , to bethsaida , while he dismissed the crowd . 
 after saying farewell to them , he went up on the mountain to pray . 
 when evening came , the boat was out on the sea , and he was alone on the land . 
 when he saw that they were straining at the oars against an adverse wind , he came towards them early in the morning , walking on the sea . 
 he intended to pass them by . 
 but when they saw him walking on the sea , they thought it was a ghost and cried out ; for they all saw him and were terrified . 
 but immediately he spoke to them and said , take heart , it is i ; do not be afraid . 
 then he got into the boat with them and the wind ceased . 
 and they were utterly astounded , for they did not understand about the loaves , but their hearts were hardened . 
 when they had crossed over , they came to land at gennesaret and moored the boat . 
 when they got out of the boat , people at once recognized him , and rushed about that whole region and began to bring the sick on mats to wherever they heard he was . 
 and wherever he went , into villages or cities or farms , they laid the sick in the marketplaces , and begged him that they might touch even the fringe of his cloak ; and all who touched it were healed . 
 now when the pharisees and some of the scribes who had come from jerusalem gathered around him , they noticed that some of his disciples were eating with defiled hands , that is , without washing them . 
 (for the pharisees , and all the jews , do not eat unless they thoroughly wash their hands , thus observing the tradition of the elders ; and they do not eat anything from the market unless they wash it ; and there are also many other traditions that they observe , the washing of cups , pots , and bronze kettles .) so the pharisees and the scribes asked him , why do your disciples not live according to the tradition of the elders , but eat with defiled hands ? 
 he said to them , isaiah prophesied rightly about you hypocrites , as it is written , 
 this people honors me with their lips , 
 but their hearts are far from me ; 
 in vain do they worship me , 
 teaching human precepts as doctrines . 
 you abandon the commandment of god and hold to human tradition . 
 then he said to them , you have a fine way of rejecting the commandment of god in order to keep your tradition ! 
 for moses said , honor your father and your mother ; and , whoever speaks evil of father or mother must surely die . 
 but you say that if anyone tells father or mother , whatever support you might have had from me is corban (that is , an offering to god)- then you no longer permit doing anything for a father or mother , thus making void the word of god through your tradition that you have handed on . 
 and you do many things like this . 
 then he called the crowd again and said to them , listen to me , all of you , and understand : there is nothing outside a person that by going in can defile , but the things that come out are what defile . 
 when he had left the crowd and entered the house , his disciples asked him about the parable . 
 he said to them , then do you also fail to understand ? 
 do you not see that whatever goes into a person from outside cannot defile , since it enters , not the heart but the stomach , and goes out into the sewer ? 
 (thus he declared all foods clean .) and he said , it is what comes out of a person that defiles . 
 for it is from within , from the human heart , that evil intentions come : fornication , theft , murder , adultery , avarice , wickedness , deceit , licentiousness , envy , slander , pride , folly . 
 all these evil things come from within , and they defile a person . 
 from there he set out and went away to the region of tyre . 
 he entered a house and did not want anyone to know he was there . 
 yet he could not escape notice , but a woman whose little daughter had an unclean spirit immediately heard about him , and she came and bowed down at his feet . 
 now the woman was a gentile , of syrophoenician origin . 
 she begged him to cast the demon out of her daughter . 
 he said to her , let the children be fed first , for it is not fair to take the childrens food and throw it to the dogs . 
 but she answered him , sir , even the dogs under the table eat the childrens crumbs . 
 then he said to her , for saying that , you may go-the demon has left your daughter . 
 so she went home , found the child lying on the bed , and the demon gone . 
 then he returned from the region of tyre , and went by way of sidon towards the sea of galilee , in the region of the decapolis . 
 they brought to him a deaf man who had an impediment in his speech ; and they begged him to lay his hand on him . 
 he took him aside in private , away from the crowd , and put his fingers into his ears , and he spat and touched his tongue . 
 then looking up to heaven , he sighed and said to him , ephphatha , that is , be opened . 
 and immediately his ears were opened , his tongue was released , and he spoke plainly . 
 then jesus ordered them to tell no one ; but the more he ordered them , the more zealously they proclaimed it . 
 they were astounded beyond measure , saying , he has done everything well ; he even makes the deaf to hear and the mute to speak . 
 in those days when there was again a great crowd without anything to eat , he called his disciples and said to them , i have compassion for the crowd , because they have been with me now for three days and have nothing to eat . 
 if i send them away hungry to their homes , they will faint on the way-and some of them have come from a great distance . 
 his disciples replied , how can one feed these people with bread here in the desert ? 
 he asked them , how many loaves do you have ? 
 they said , seven . 
 then he ordered the crowd to sit down on the ground ; and he took the seven loaves , and after giving thanks he broke them and gave them to his disciples to distribute ; and they distributed them to the crowd . 
 they had also a few small fish ; and after blessing them , he ordered that these too should be distributed . 
 they ate and were filled ; and they took up the broken pieces left over , seven baskets full . 
 now there were about four thousand people . 
 and he sent them away . 
 and immediately he got into the boat with his disciples and went to the district of dalmanutha . 
 the pharisees came and began to argue with him , asking him for a sign from heaven , to test him . 
 and he sighed deeply in his spirit and said , why does this generation ask for a sign ? 
 truly i tell you , no sign will be given to this generation . 
 and he left them , and getting into the boat again , he went across to the other side . 
 now the disciples had forgotten to bring any bread ; and they had only one loaf with them in the boat . 
 and he cautioned them , saying , watch out-beware of the yeast of the pharisees and the yeast of herod . 
 they said to one another , it is because we have no bread . 
 and becoming aware of it , jesus said to them , why are you talking about having no bread ? 
 do you still not perceive or understand ? 
 are your hearts hardened ? 
 do you have eyes , and fail to see ? 
 do you have ears , and fail to hear ? 
 and do you not remember ? 
 when i broke the five loaves for the five thousand , how many baskets full of broken pieces did you collect ? 
 they said to him , twelve . 
 and the seven for the four thousand , how many baskets full of broken pieces did you collect ? 
 and they said to him , seven . 
 then he said to them , do you not yet understand ? 
 they came to bethsaida . 
 some people brought a blind man to him and begged him to touch him . 
 he took the blind man by the hand and led him out of the village ; and when he had put saliva on his eyes and laid his hands on him , he asked him , can you see anything ? 
 and the man looked up and said , i can see people , but they look like trees , walking . 
 then jesus laid his hands on his eyes again ; and he looked intently and his sight was restored , and he saw everything clearly . 
 then he sent him away to his home , saying , do not even go into the village . 
 jesus went on with his disciples to the villages of caesarea philippi ; and on the way he asked his disciples , who do people say that i am ? 
 and they answered him , john the baptist ; and others , elijah ; and still others , one of the prophets . 
 he asked them , but who do you say that i am ? 
 peter answered him , you are the messiah . 
 and he sternly ordered them not to tell anyone about him . 
 then he began to teach them that the son of man must undergo great suffering , and be rejected by the elders , the chief priests , and the scribes , and be killed , and after three days rise again . 
 he said all this quite openly . 
 and peter took him aside and began to rebuke him . 
 but turning and looking at his disciples , he rebuked peter and said , get behind me , satan ! 
 for you are setting your mind not on divine things but on human things . 
 he called the crowd with his disciples , and said to them , if any want to become my followers , let them deny themselves and take up their cross and follow me . 
 for those who want to save their life will lose it , and those who lose their life for my sake , and for the sake of the gospel , will save it . 
 for what will it profit them to gain the whole world and forfeit their life ? 
 indeed , what can they give in return for their life ? 
 those who are ashamed of me and of my words in this adulterous and sinful generation , of them the son of man will also be ashamed when he comes in the glory of his father with the holy angels . 
 and he said to them , truly i tell you , there are some standing here who will not taste death until they see that the kingdom of god has come with power . 
 six days later , jesus took with him peter and james and john , and led them up a high mountain apart , by themselves . 
 and he was transfigured before them , and his clothes became dazzling white , such as no one on earth could bleach them . 
 and there appeared to them elijah with moses , who were talking with jesus . 
 then peter said to jesus , rabbi , it is good for us to be here ; let us make three dwellings , one for you , one for moses , and one for elijah . 
 he did not know what to say , for they were terrified . 
 then a cloud overshadowed them , and from the cloud there came a voice , this is my son , the beloved ; listen to him ! 
 suddenly when they looked around , they saw no one with them any more , but only jesus . 
 as they were coming down the mountain , he ordered them to tell no one about what they had seen , until after the son of man had risen from the dead . 
 so they kept the matter to themselves , questioning what this rising from the dead could mean . 
 then they asked him , why do the scribes say that elijah must come first ? 
 he said to them , elijah is indeed coming first to restore all things . 
 how then is it written about the son of man , that he is to go through many sufferings and be treated with contempt ? 
 but i tell you that elijah has come , and they did to him whatever they pleased , as it is written about him . 
 when they came to the disciples , they saw a great crowd around them , and some scribes arguing with them . 
 when the whole crowd saw him , they were immediately overcome with awe , and they ran forward to greet him . 
 he asked them , what are you arguing about with them ? 
 someone from the crowd answered him , teacher , i brought you my son ; he has a spirit that makes him unable to speak ; and whenever it seizes him , it dashes him down ; and he foams and grinds his teeth and becomes rigid ; and i asked your disciples to cast it out , but they could not do so . 
 he answered them , you faithless generation , how much longer must i be among you ? 
 how much longer must i put up with you ? 
 bring him to me . 
 and they brought the boy to him . 
 when the spirit saw him , immediately it convulsed the boy , and he fell on the ground and rolled about , foaming at the mouth . 
 jesus asked the father , how long has this been happening to him ? 
 and he said , from childhood . 
 it has often cast him into the fire and into the water , to destroy him ; but if you are able to do anything , have pity on us and help us . 
 jesus said to him , if you are able ! 
 -all things can be done for the one who believes . 
 immediately the father of the child cried out , i believe ; help my unbelief ! 
 when jesus saw that a crowd came running together , he rebuked the unclean spirit , saying to it , you spirit that keeps this boy from speaking and hearing , i command you , come out of him , and never enter him again ! 
 after crying out and convulsing him terribly , it came out , and the boy was like a corpse , so that most of them said , he is dead . 
 but jesus took him by the hand and lifted him up , and he was able to stand . 
 when he had entered the house , his disciples asked him privately , why could we not cast it out ? 
 he said to them , this kind can come out only through prayer . 
 they went on from there and passed through galilee . 
 he did not want anyone to know it ; for he was teaching his disciples , saying to them , the son of man is to be betrayed into human hands , and they will kill him , and three days after being killed , he will rise again . 
 but they did not understand what he was saying and were afraid to ask him . 
 then they came to capernaum ; and when he was in the house he asked them , what were you arguing about on the way ? 
 but they were silent , for on the way they had argued with one another who was the greatest . 
 he sat down , called the twelve , and said to them , whoever wants to be first must be last of all and servant of all . 
 then he took a little child and put it among them ; and taking it in his arms , he said to them , whoever welcomes one such child in my name welcomes me , and whoever welcomes me welcomes not me but the one who sent me . 
 john said to him , teacher , we saw someone casting out demons in your name , and we tried to stop him , because he was not following us . 
 but jesus said , do not stop him ; for no one who does a deed of power in my name will be able soon afterward to speak evil of me . 
 whoever is not against us is for us . 
 for truly i tell you , whoever gives you a cup of water to drink because you bear the name of christ will by no means lose the reward . 
 if any of you put a stumbling block before one of these little ones who believe in me , it would be better for you if a great millstone were hung around your neck and you were thrown into the sea . 
 if your hand causes you to stumble , cut it off ; it is better for you to enter life maimed than to have two hands and to go to hell , to the unquenchable fire . 
 and if your foot causes you to stumble , cut it off ; it is better for you to enter life lame than to have two feet and to be thrown into hell . 
 and if your eye causes you to stumble , tear it out ; it is better for you to enter the kingdom of god with one eye than to have two eyes and to be thrown into hell , where their worm never dies , and the fire is never quenched . 
 for everyone will be salted with fire . 
 salt is good ; but if salt has lost its saltiness , how can you season it ? 
 have salt in yourselves , and be at peace with one another . 
 he left that place and went to the region of judea and beyond the jordan . 
 and crowds again gathered around him ; and , as was his custom , he again taught them . 
 some pharisees came , and to test him they asked , is it lawful for a man to divorce his wife ? 
 he answered them , what did moses command you ? 
 they said , moses allowed a man to write a certificate of dismissal and to divorce her . 
 but jesus said to them , because of your hardness of heart he wrote this commandment for you . 
 but from the beginning of creation , god made them male and female . 
 for this reason a man shall leave his father and mother and be joined to his wife , and the two shall become one flesh . 
 so they are no longer two , but one flesh . 
 therefore what god has joined together , let no one separate . 
 then in the house the disciples asked him again about this matter . 
 he said to them , whoever divorces his wife and marries another commits adultery against her ; and if she divorces her husband and marries another , she commits adultery . 
 people were bringing little children to him in order that he might touch them ; and the disciples spoke sternly to them . 
 but when jesus saw this , he was indignant and said to them , let the little children come to me ; do not stop them ; for it is to such as these that the kingdom of god belongs . 
 truly i tell you , whoever does not receive the kingdom of god as a little child will never enter it . 
 and he took them up in his arms , laid his hands on them , and blessed them . 
 as he was setting out on a journey , a man ran up and knelt before him , and asked him , good teacher , what must i do to inherit eternal life ? 
 jesus said to him , why do you call me good ? 
 no one is good but god alone . 
 you know the commandments : you shall not murder ; you shall not commit adultery ; you shall not steal ; you shall not bear false witness ; you shall not defraud ; honor your father and mother . he said to him , teacher , i have kept all these since my youth . 
 jesus , looking at him , loved him and said , you lack one thing ; go , sell what you own , and give the money to the poor , and you will have treasure in heaven ; then come , follow me . 
 when he heard this , he was shocked and went away grieving , for he had many possessions . 
 then jesus looked around and said to his disciples , how hard it will be for those who have wealth to enter the kingdom of god ! 
 and the disciples were perplexed at these words . 
 but jesus said to them again , children , how hard it is to enter the kingdom of god ! 
 it is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle than for someone who is rich to enter the kingdom of god . 
 they were greatly astounded and said to one another , then who can be saved ? 
 jesus looked at them and said , for mortals it is impossible , but not for god ; for god all things are possible . 
 peter began to say to him , look , we have left everything and followed you . 
 jesus said , truly i tell you , there is no one who has left house or brothers or sisters or mother or father or children or fields , for my sake and for the sake of the good news , who will not receive a hundredfold now in this age-houses , brothers and sisters , mothers and children , and fields with persecutions-and in the age to come eternal life . 
 but many who are first will be last , and the last will be first . 
 they were on the road , going up to jerusalem , and jesus was walking ahead of them ; they were amazed , and those who followed were afraid . 
 he took the twelve aside again and began to tell them what was to happen to him , saying , see , we are going up to jerusalem , and the son of man will be handed over to the chief priests and the scribes , and they will condemn him to death ; then they will hand him over to the gentiles ; they will mock him , and spit upon him , and flog him , and kill him ; and after three days he will rise again . 
 james and john , the sons of zebedee , came forward to him and said to him , teacher , we want you to do for us whatever we ask of you . 
 and he said to them , what is it you want me to do for you ? 
 and they said to him , grant us to sit , one at your right hand and one at your left , in your glory . 
 but jesus said to them , you do not know what you are asking . 
 are you able to drink the cup that i drink , or be baptized with the baptism that i am baptized with ? 
 they replied , we are able . 
 then jesus said to them , the cup that i drink you will drink ; and with the baptism with which i am baptized , you will be baptized ; but to sit at my right hand or at my left is not mine to grant , but it is for those for whom it has been prepared . 
 when the ten heard this , they began to be angry with james and john . 
 so jesus called them and said to them , you know that among the gentiles those whom they recognize as their rulers lord it over them , and their great ones are tyrants over them . 
 but it is not so among you ; but whoever wishes to become great among you must be your servant , and whoever wishes to be first among you must be slave of all . 
 for the son of man came not to be served but to serve , and to give his life a ransom for many . 
 they came to jericho . 
 as he and his disciples and a large crowd were leaving jericho , bartimaeus son of timaeus , a blind beggar , was sitting by the roadside . 
 when he heard that it was jesus of nazareth , he began to shout out and say , jesus , son of david , have mercy on me ! 
 many sternly ordered him to be quiet , but he cried out even more loudly , son of david , have mercy on me ! 
 jesus stood still and said , call him here . 
 and they called the blind man , saying to him , take heart ; get up , he is calling you . 
 so throwing off his cloak , he sprang up and came to jesus . 
 then jesus said to him , what do you want me to do for you ? 
 the blind man said to him , my teacher , let me see again . 
 jesus said to him , go ; your faith has made you well . 
 immediately he regained his sight and followed him on the way . 
 when they were approaching jerusalem , at bethphage and bethany , near the mount of olives , he sent two of his disciples and said to them , go into the village ahead of you , and immediately as you enter it , you will find tied there a colt that has never been ridden ; untie it and bring it . 
 if anyone says to you , why are you doing this ? 
 just say this , the lord needs it and will send it back here immediately . they went away and found a colt tied near a door , outside in the street . 
 as they were untying it , some of the bystanders said to them , what are you doing , untying the colt ? 
 they told them what jesus had said ; and they allowed them to take it . 
 then they brought the colt to jesus and threw their cloaks on it ; and he sat on it . 
 many people spread their cloaks on the road , and others spread leafy branches that they had cut in the fields . 
 then those who went ahead and those who followed were shouting , 
 hosanna ! 
 blessed is the one who comes in the name of the lord ! 
 blessed is the coming kingdom of our ancestor david ! 
 hosanna in the highest heaven ! 
 then he entered jerusalem and went into the temple ; and when he had looked around at everything , as it was already late , he went out to bethany with the twelve . 
 on the following day , when they came from bethany , he was hungry . 
 seeing in the distance a fig tree in leaf , he went to see whether perhaps he would find anything on it . 
 when he came to it , he found nothing but leaves , for it was not the season for figs . 
 he said to it , may no one ever eat fruit from you again . 
 and his disciples heard it . 
 then they came to jerusalem . 
 and he entered the temple and began to drive out those who were selling and those who were buying in the temple , and he overturned the tables of the money changers and the seats of those who sold doves ; and he would not allow anyone to carry anything through the temple . 
 he was teaching and saying , is it not written , 
 my house shall be called a house of prayer for all the nations ? 
 but you have made it a den of robbers . 
 and when the chief priests and the scribes heard it , they kept looking for a way to kill him ; for they were afraid of him , because the whole crowd was spellbound by his teaching . 
 and when evening came , jesus and his disciples went out of the city . 
 in the morning as they passed by , they saw the fig tree withered away to its roots . 
 then peter remembered and said to him , rabbi , look ! 
 the fig tree that you cursed has withered . 
 jesus answered them , have faith in god . 
 truly i tell you , if you say to this mountain , be taken up and thrown into the sea , and if you do not doubt in your heart , but believe that what you say will come to pass , it will be done for you . 
 so i tell you , whatever you ask for in prayer , believe that you have received it , and it will be yours . 
 whenever you stand praying , forgive , if you have anything against anyone ; so that your father in heaven may also forgive you your trespasses . 
 again they came to jerusalem . 
 as he was walking in the temple , the chief priests , the scribes , and the elders came to him and said , by what authority are you doing these things ? 
 who gave you this authority to do them ? 
 jesus said to them , i will ask you one question ; answer me , and i will tell you by what authority i do these things . 
 did the baptism of john come from heaven , or was it of human origin ? 
 answer me . 
 they argued with one another , if we say , from heaven , he will say , why then did you not believe him ? 
 but shall we say , of human origin ? 
 -they were afraid of the crowd , for all regarded john as truly a prophet . 
 so they answered jesus , we do not know . 
 and jesus said to them , neither will i tell you by what authority i am doing these things . 
 then he began to speak to them in parables . 
 a man planted a vineyard , put a fence around it , dug a pit for the wine press , and built a watchtower ; then he leased it to tenants and went to another country . 
 when the season came , he sent a slave to the tenants to collect from them his share of the produce of the vineyard . 
 but they seized him , and beat him , and sent him away empty-handed . 
 and again he sent another slave to them ; this one they beat over the head and insulted . 
 then he sent another , and that one they killed . 
 and so it was with many others ; some they beat , and others they killed . 
 he had still one other , a beloved son . 
 finally he sent him to them , saying , they will respect my son . 
 but those tenants said to one another , this is the heir ; come , let us kill him , and the inheritance will be ours . 
 so they seized him , killed him , and threw him out of the vineyard . 
 what then will the owner of the vineyard do ? 
 he will come and destroy the tenants and give the vineyard to others . 
 have you not read this scripture : 
 the stone that the builders rejected 
 has become the cornerstone ; 
 this was the lords doing , 
 and it is amazing in our eyes ? 
 when they realized that he had told this parable against them , they wanted to arrest him , but they feared the crowd . 
 so they left him and went away . 
 then they sent to him some pharisees and some herodians to trap him in what he said . 
 and they came and said to him , teacher , we know that you are sincere , and show deference to no one ; for you do not regard people with partiality , but teach the way of god in accordance with truth . 
 is it lawful to pay taxes to the emperor , or not ? 
 should we pay them , or should we not ? 
 but knowing their hypocrisy , he said to them , why are you putting me to the test ? 
 bring me a denarius and let me see it . 
 and they brought one . 
 then he said to them , whose head is this , and whose title ? 
 they answered , the emperors . 
 jesus said to them , give to the emperor the things that are the emperors , and to god the things that are gods . 
 and they were utterly amazed at him . 
 some sadducees , who say there is no resurrection , came to him and asked him a question , saying , teacher , moses wrote for us that if a mans brother dies , leaving a wife but no child , the man shall marry the widow and raise up children for his brother . 
 there were seven brothers ; the first married and , when he died , left no children ; and the second married her and died , leaving no children ; and the third likewise ; none of the seven left children . 
 last of all the woman herself died . 
 in the resurrection whose wife will she be ? 
 for the seven had married her . 
 jesus said to them , is not this the reason you are wrong , that you know neither the scriptures nor the power of god ? 
 for when they rise from the dead , they neither marry nor are given in marriage , but are like angels in heaven . 
 and as for the dead being raised , have you not read in the book of moses , in the story about the bush , how god said to him , i am the god of abraham , the god of isaac , and the god of jacob ? 
 he is god not of the dead , but of the living ; you are quite wrong . 
 one of the scribes came near and heard them disputing with one another , and seeing that he answered them well , he asked him , which commandment is the first of all ? 
 jesus answered , the first is , hear , o israel : the lord our god , the lord is one ; you shall love the lord your god with all your heart , and with all your soul , and with all your mind , and with all your strength . 
 the second is this , you shall love your neighbor as yourself . 
 there is no other commandment greater than these . 
 then the scribe said to him , you are right , teacher ; you have truly said that he is one , and besides him there is no other ; and to love him with all the heart , and with all the understanding , and with all the strength , and to love ones neighbor as oneself , -this is much more important than all whole burnt offerings and sacrifices . 
 when jesus saw that he answered wisely , he said to him , you are not far from the kingdom of god . 
 after that no one dared to ask him any question . 
 while jesus was teaching in the temple , he said , how can the scribes say that the messiah is the son of david ? 
 david himself , by the holy spirit , declared , 
 the lord said to my lord , 
 sit at my right hand , 
 until i put your enemies under your feet . 
 david himself calls him lord ; so how can he be his son ? 
 and the large crowd was listening to him with delight . 
 as he taught , he said , beware of the scribes , who like to walk around in long robes , and to be greeted with respect in the marketplaces , and to have the best seats in the synagogues and places of honor at banquets ! 
 they devour widows houses and for the sake of appearance say long prayers . 
 they will receive the greater condemnation . 
 he sat down opposite the treasury , and watched the crowd putting money into the treasury . 
 many rich people put in large sums . 
 a poor widow came and put in two small copper coins , which are worth a penny . 
 then he called his disciples and said to them , truly i tell you , this poor widow has put in more than all those who are contributing to the treasury . 
 for all of them have contributed out of their abundance ; but she out of her poverty has put in everything she had , all she had to live on . 
 as he came out of the temple , one of his disciples said to him , look , teacher , what large stones and what large buildings ! 
 then jesus asked him , do you see these great buildings ? 
 not one stone will be left here upon another ; all will be thrown down . 
 when he was sitting on the mount of olives opposite the temple , peter , james , john , and andrew asked him privately , tell us , when will this be , and what will be the sign that all these things are about to be accomplished ? 
 then jesus began to say to them , beware that no one leads you astray . 
 many will come in my name and say , i am he ! 
 and they will lead many astray . 
 when you hear of wars and rumors of wars , do not be alarmed ; this must take place , but the end is still to come . 
 for nation will rise against nation , and kingdom against kingdom ; there will be earthquakes in various places ; there will be famines . 
 this is but the beginning of the birthpangs . 
 as for yourselves , beware ; for they will hand you over to councils ; and you will be beaten in synagogues ; and you will stand before governors and kings because of me , as a testimony to them . 
 and the good news must first be proclaimed to all nations . 
 when they bring you to trial and hand you over , do not worry beforehand about what you are to say ; but say whatever is given you at that time , for it is not you who speak , but the holy spirit . 
 brother will betray brother to death , and a father his child , and children will rise against parents and have them put to death ; and you will be hated by all because of my name . 
 but the one who endures to the end will be saved . 
 but when you see the desolating sacrilege set up where it ought not to be (let the reader understand), then those in judea must flee to the mountains ; the one on the housetop must not go down or enter the house to take anything away ; the one in the field must not turn back to get a coat . 
 woe to those who are pregnant and to those who are nursing infants in those days ! 
 pray that it may not be in winter . 
 for in those days there will be suffering , such as has not been from the beginning of the creation that god created until now , no , and never will be . 
 and if the lord had not cut short those days , no one would be saved ; but for the sake of the elect , whom he chose , he has cut short those days . 
 and if anyone says to you at that time , look ! 
 here is the messiah ! 
 or look ! 
 there he is ! 
 -do not believe it . 
 false messiahs and false prophets will appear and produce signs and omens , to lead astray , if possible , the elect . 
 but be alert ; i have already told you everything . 
 but in those days , after that suffering , 
 the sun will be darkened , 
 and the moon will not give its light , 
 and the stars will be falling from heaven , 
 and the powers in the heavens will be shaken . 
 then they will see the son of man coming in clouds with great power and glory . 
 then he will send out the angels , and gather his elect from the four winds , from the ends of the earth to the ends of heaven . 
 from the fig tree learn its lesson : as soon as its branch becomes tender and puts forth its leaves , you know that summer is near . 
 so also , when you see these things taking place , you know that he is near , at the very gates . 
 truly i tell you , this generation will not pass away until all these things have taken place . 
 heaven and earth will pass away , but my words will not pass away . 
 but about that day or hour no one knows , neither the angels in heaven , nor the son , but only the father . 
 beware , keep alert ; for you do not know when the time will come . 
 it is like a man going on a journey , when he leaves home and puts his slaves in charge , each with his work , and commands the doorkeeper to be on the watch . 
 therefore , keep awake-for you do not know when the master of the house will come , in the evening , or at midnight , or at cockcrow , or at dawn , or else he may find you asleep when he comes suddenly . 
 and what i say to you i say to all : keep awake . 
 it was two days before the passover and the festival of unleavened bread . 
 the chief priests and the scribes were looking for a way to arrest jesus by stealth and kill him ; for they said , not during the festival , or there may be a riot among the people . 
 while he was at bethany in the house of simon the leper , as he sat at the table , a woman came with an alabaster jar of very costly ointment of nard , and she broke open the jar and poured the ointment on his head . 
 but some were there who said to one another in anger , why was the ointment wasted in this way ? 
 for this ointment could have been sold for more than three hundred denarii , and the money given to the poor . 
 and they scolded her . 
 but jesus said , let her alone ; why do you trouble her ? 
 she has performed a good service for me . 
 for you always have the poor with you , and you can show kindness to them whenever you wish ; but you will not always have me . 
 she has done what she could ; she has anointed my body beforehand for its burial . 
 truly i tell you , wherever the good news is proclaimed in the whole world , what she has done will be told in remembrance of her . 
 then judas iscariot , who was one of the twelve , went to the chief priests in order to betray him to them . 
 when they heard it , they were greatly pleased , and promised to give him money . 
 so he began to look for an opportunity to betray him . 
 on the first day of unleavened bread , when the passover lamb is sacrificed , his disciples said to him , where do you want us to go and make the preparations for you to eat the passover ? 
 so he sent two of his disciples , saying to them , go into the city , and a man carrying a jar of water will meet you ; follow him , and wherever he enters , say to the owner of the house , the teacher asks , where is my guest room where i may eat the passover with my disciples ? 
 he will show you a large room upstairs , furnished and ready . 
 make preparations for us there . 
 so the disciples set out and went to the city , and found everything as he had told them ; and they prepared the passover meal . 
 when it was evening , he came with the twelve . 
 and when they had taken their places and were eating , jesus said , truly i tell you , one of you will betray me , one who is eating with me . 
 they began to be distressed and to say to him one after another , surely , not i ? 
 he said to them , it is one of the twelve , one who is dipping bread into the bowl with me . 
 for the son of man goes as it is written of him , but woe to that one by whom the son of man is betrayed ! 
 it would have been better for that one not to have been born . 
 while they were eating , he took a loaf of bread , and after blessing it he broke it , gave it to them , and said , take ; this is my body . 
 then he took a cup , and after giving thanks he gave it to them , and all of them drank from it . 
 he said to them , this is my blood of the covenant , which is poured out for many . 
 truly i tell you , i will never again drink of the fruit of the vine until that day when i drink it new in the kingdom of god . 
 when they had sung the hymn , they went out to the mount of olives . 
 and jesus said to them , you will all become deserters ; for it is written , 
 i will strike the shepherd , 
 and the sheep will be scattered . 
 but after i am raised up , i will go before you to galilee . 
 peter said to him , even though all become deserters , i will not . 
 jesus said to him , truly i tell you , this day , this very night , before the cock crows twice , you will deny me three times . 
 but he said vehemently , even though i must die with you , i will not deny you . 
 and all of them said the same . 
 they went to a place called gethsemane ; and he said to his disciples , sit here while i pray . 
 he took with him peter and james and john , and began to be distressed and agitated . 
 and he said to them , i am deeply grieved , even to death ; remain here , and keep awake . 
 and going a little farther , he threw himself on the ground and prayed that , if it were possible , the hour might pass from him . 
 he said , abba , father , for you all things are possible ; remove this cup from me ; yet , not what i want , but what you want . 
 he came and found them sleeping ; and he said to peter , simon , are you asleep ? 
 could you not keep awake one hour ? 
 keep awake and pray that you may not come into the time of trial ; the spirit indeed is willing , but the flesh is weak . 
 and again he went away and prayed , saying the same words . 
 and once more he came and found them sleeping , for their eyes were very heavy ; and they did not know what to say to him . 
 he came a third time and said to them , are you still sleeping and taking your rest ? 
 enough ! 
 the hour has come ; the son of man is betrayed into the hands of sinners . 
 get up , let us be going . 
 see , my betrayer is at hand . 
 immediately , while he was still speaking , judas , one of the twelve , arrived ; and with him there was a crowd with swords and clubs , from the chief priests , the scribes , and the elders . 
 now the betrayer had given them a sign , saying , the one i will kiss is the man ; arrest him and lead him away under guard . 
 so when he came , he went up to him at once and said , rabbi ! 
 and kissed him . 
 then they laid hands on him and arrested him . 
 but one of those who stood near drew his sword and struck the slave of the high priest , cutting off his ear . 
 then jesus said to them , have you come out with swords and clubs to arrest me as though i were a bandit ? 
 day after day i was with you in the temple teaching , and you did not arrest me . 
 but let the scriptures be fulfilled . 
 all of them deserted him and fled . 
 a certain young man was following him , wearing nothing but a linen cloth . 
 they caught hold of him , but he left the linen cloth and ran off naked . 
 they took jesus to the high priest ; and all the chief priests , the elders , and the scribes were assembled . 
 peter had followed him at a distance , right into the courtyard of the high priest ; and he was sitting with the guards , warming himself at the fire . 
 now the chief priests and the whole council were looking for testimony against jesus to put him to death ; but they found none . 
 for many gave false testimony against him , and their testimony did not agree . 
 some stood up and gave false testimony against him , saying , we heard him say , i will destroy this temple that is made with hands , and in three days i will build another , not made with hands . but even on this point their testimony did not agree . 
 then the high priest stood up before them and asked jesus , have you no answer ? 
 what is it that they testify against you ? 
 but he was silent and did not answer . 
 again the high priest asked him , are you the messiah , the son of the blessed one ? 
 jesus said , i am ; and 
 you will see the son of man 
 seated at the right hand of the power , 
 and coming with the clouds of heaven . 
 then the high priest tore his clothes and said , why do we still need witnesses ? 
 you have heard his blasphemy ! 
 what is your decision ? 
 all of them condemned him as deserving death . 
 some began to spit on him , to blindfold him , and to strike him , saying to him , prophesy ! 
 the guards also took him over and beat him . 
 while peter was below in the courtyard , one of the servant-girls of the high priest came by . 
 when she saw peter warming himself , she stared at him and said , you also were with jesus , the man from nazareth . 
 but he denied it , saying , i do not know or understand what you are talking about . 
 and he went out into the forecourt . 
 then the cock crowed . 
 and the servant-girl , on seeing him , began again to say to the bystanders , this man is one of them . 
 but again he denied it . 
 then after a little while the bystanders again said to peter , certainly you are one of them ; for you are a galilean . 
 but he began to curse , and he swore an oath , i do not know this man you are talking about . 
 at that moment the cock crowed for the second time . 
 then peter remembered that jesus had said to him , before the cock crows twice , you will deny me three times . 
 and he broke down and wept . 
 as soon as it was morning , the chief priests held a consultation with the elders and scribes and the whole council . 
 they bound jesus , led him away , and handed him over to pilate . 
 pilate asked him , are you the king of the jews ? 
 he answered him , you say so . 
 then the chief priests accused him of many things . 
 pilate asked him again , have you no answer ? 
 see how many charges they bring against you . 
 but jesus made no further reply , so that pilate was amazed . 
 now at the festival he used to release a prisoner for them , anyone for whom they asked . 
 now a man called barabbas was in prison with the rebels who had committed murder during the insurrection . 
 so the crowd came and began to ask pilate to do for them according to his custom . 
 then he answered them , do you want me to release for you the king of the jews ? 
 for he realized that it was out of jealousy that the chief priests had handed him over . 
 but the chief priests stirred up the crowd to have him release barabbas for them instead . 
 pilate spoke to them again , then what do you wish me to do with the man you call the king of the jews ? 
 they shouted back , crucify him ! 
 pilate asked them , why , what evil has he done ? 
 but they shouted all the more , crucify him ! 
 so pilate , wishing to satisfy the crowd , released barabbas for them ; and after flogging jesus , he handed him over to be crucified . 
 then the soldiers led him into the courtyard of the palace (that is , the governors headquarters); and they called together the whole cohort . 
 and they clothed him in a purple cloak ; and after twisting some thorns into a crown , they put it on him . 
 and they began saluting him , hail , king of the jews ! 
 they struck his head with a reed , spat upon him , and knelt down in homage to him . 
 after mocking him , they stripped him of the purple cloak and put his own clothes on him . 
 then they led him out to crucify him . 
 they compelled a passer-by , who was coming in from the country , to carry his cross ; it was simon of cyrene , the father of alexander and rufus . 
 then they brought jesus to the place called golgotha (which means the place of a skull). 
 and they offered him wine mixed with myrrh ; but he did not take it . 
 and they crucified him , and divided his clothes among them , casting lots to decide what each should take . 
 it was nine oclock in the morning when they crucified him . 
 the inscription of the charge against him read , the king of the jews . 
 and with him they crucified two bandits , one on his right and one on his left . 
 those who passed by derided him , shaking their heads and saying , aha ! 
 you who would destroy the temple and build it in three days , save yourself , and come down from the cross ! 
 in the same way the chief priests , along with the scribes , were also mocking him among themselves and saying , he saved others ; he cannot save himself . 
 let the messiah , the king of israel , come down from the cross now , so that we may see and believe . 
 those who were crucified with him also taunted him . 
 when it was noon , darkness came over the whole land until three in the afternoon . 
 at three oclock jesus cried out with a loud voice , eloi , eloi , lema sabachthani ? 
 which means , my god , my god , why have you forsaken me ? 
 when some of the bystanders heard it , they said , listen , he is calling for elijah . 
 and someone ran , filled a sponge with sour wine , put it on a stick , and gave it to him to drink , saying , wait , let us see whether elijah will come to take him down . 
 then jesus gave a loud cry and breathed his last . 
 and the curtain of the temple was torn in two , from top to bottom . 
 now when the centurion , who stood facing him , saw that in this way he breathed his last , he said , truly this man was gods son ! 
 there were also women looking on from a distance ; among them were mary magdalene , and mary the mother of james the younger and of joses , and salome . 
 these used to follow him and provided for him when he was in galilee ; and there were many other women who had come up with him to jerusalem . 
 when evening had come , and since it was the day of preparation , that is , the day before the sabbath , joseph of arimathea , a respected member of the council , who was also himself waiting expectantly for the kingdom of god , went boldly to pilate and asked for the body of jesus . 
 then pilate wondered if he were already dead ; and summoning the centurion , he asked him whether he had been dead for some time . 
 when he learned from the centurion that he was dead , he granted the body to joseph . 
 then joseph bought a linen cloth , and taking down the body , wrapped it in the linen cloth , and laid it in a tomb that had been hewn out of the rock . 
 he then rolled a stone against the door of the tomb . 
 mary magdalene and mary the mother of joses saw where the body was laid . 
 when the sabbath was over , mary magdalene , and mary the mother of james , and salome bought spices , so that they might go and anoint him . 
 and very early on the first day of the week , when the sun had risen , they went to the tomb . 
 they had been saying to one another , who will roll away the stone for us from the entrance to the tomb ? 
 when they looked up , they saw that the stone , which was very large , had already been rolled back . 
 as they entered the tomb , they saw a young man , dressed in a white robe , sitting on the right side ; and they were alarmed . 
 but he said to them , do not be alarmed ; you are looking for jesus of nazareth , who was crucified . 
 he has been raised ; he is not here . 
 look , there is the place they laid him . 
 but go , tell his disciples and peter that he is going ahead of you to galilee ; there you will see him , just as he told you . 
 so they went out and fled from the tomb , for terror and amazement had seized them ; and they said nothing to anyone , for they were afraid . 
 now after he rose early on the first day of the week , he appeared first to mary magdalene , from whom he had cast out seven demons . 
 she went out and told those who had been with him , while they were mourning and weeping . 
 but when they heard that he was alive and had been seen by her , they would not believe it . 
 after this he appeared in another form to two of them , as they were walking into the country . 
 and they went back and told the rest , but they did not believe them . 
 later he appeared to the eleven themselves as they were sitting at the table ; and he upbraided them for their lack of faith and stubbornness , because they had not believed those who saw him after he had risen . 
 and he said to them , go into all the world and proclaim the good news to the whole creation . 
 the one who believes and is baptized will be saved ; but the one who does not believe will be condemned . 
 and these signs will accompany those who believe : by using my name they will cast out demons ; they will speak in new tongues ; they will pick up snakes in their hands , and if they drink any deadly thing , it will not hurt them ; they will lay their hands on the sick , and they will recover . 
 so then the lord jesus , after he had spoken to them , was taken up into heaven and sat down at the right hand of god . 
 and they went out and proclaimed the good news everywhere , while the lord worked with them and confirmed the message by the signs that accompanied it . 
 